>> My name is Barry.
They call me Clunker.
And I'm one of the original
people of the gatherings.
Now, the gatherings is a
lot of visionary process.
And it's a whole lot
of common sense--
what we call faith
and elbow grease.
And basically, what it
is is that people come
and volunteer to share,
and provide, and help
set up the ceremonial grounds--
the gathering grounds, as we
call them, the common grounds--
and for ceremonies for people
to come from all over the world
to share their prayer, their
expression, their speech,
their art, their
music, their lives,
and to connect with one another.
Now, out of all of the
Earth, all over the Earth,
there are people
who believe that all
the people of the
Earth are their family,
are their spiritual
brothers and sisters.
Now, out of all of
that, some of them
fly the rainbow
colors year round.
And out of that, from
all over the world
comes people to the
annual gathering
of the tribes in North America
here, July 1 through 7.
And they come early from
the global Rainbow Family.
They're flying their colors.
And the folks who come home,
and help, and volunteer,
and help out, and
give their consensus,
their good vibrations--
their will, their goodwill--
to the circle are the
Rainbow Family tribe.
Now, of all of these
people, over the years
we discovered a common sense--
consensus, as we call it--
that there is
community kitchens.
And out of these
community kitchens
now, there are many,
many crews that come.
For example, at this
gathering, there's
probably about 100
to 150 kitchens.
Now, how are these
kitchens set up?
They're set up so that
they not only provide food,
but they also provide
an opportunity to people
to collect together and help
one another, feed one another.
This also works the same way
with digging slit trenches,
parking cars, doing circles.
So in a lot of ways,
it's all sort of prayer.
But we have people come
from all over the world.
And right here, right
now, there is probably
20,000 people in the circle.
We had hundreds, and hundreds,
and hundreds of children--
perhaps it's almost as
many as 2,000 children.
And we have even more
than that on site.
And in the circle,
there was probably
another 20,000 people
on the outer edge,
all through the gathering.
It stretched for miles,
and miles, and miles.
Now, of all of these
people, over the years
we discovered a common sense--
consensus, as we call it--
that there is
community kitchens.
And out of these
community kitchens
now, there are many,
many crews that come.
For example, at this
gathering, there's
probably about 100
to 150 kitchens.
Now, how are these
kitchens set up?
They're set up so that
they not only provide food,
but they also provide an
opportunity for people
to collect together and help
one another, feed one another.
And so we now have people
who come-- and have,
for many years, since
very beginning days, which
I helped begin-- which is what
we call the scouting and seed
camps.
And these scouting help
find the appropriate site.
And the seed camp people
come, and Spring Council,
who looks at all the
options the scouts provide.
And they reach a consensus.
That's not a decision.
That's a consensus.
It's a different thing.
And if we need
more slit trenches,
if we need more
people to park cars,
if we need more people to
haul in food, or water pipe,
or any of these other
things, then people
volunteer of their
own free will.
It's all done by individuals
operating their own free will
but, in fact, seeking to
help the community develop.
For instance, they
leave their jobs
on a two-week vacation from
Wall Street, and businesses,
and jobs, and all
these kinds of places.
And they may come out
here-- lawyers, and doctors,
and nurses, and garbage
people, and truck drivers,
all these kinds of people,
because most of the--
90% of the people that
come out here work jobs.
And they work jobs in
their neighborhoods
and their communities.
The other 10%-- they're like
road dogs, and a lot of them
are young.
And there are people who live
on the road that come early.
A lot of them work festivals,
and have shops, and do crafts,
and make things.
There ain't no lazy
people in the Rainbow.
There are people who come
here that just take the ride.
But then there's
all the rest of us.
The young people who
learn one thing--
that our mantra is peace.
We win.
Look after the land.
We look after the people.
Live lightly on the land.
Clean it up and take
it away when you go.
And be friendly to the
store owners in the towns.
Remember, every one of those
brothers and sisters out there
who come home, consider this--
respect is our way.
Respect is our way.
Oh, [INAUDIBLE].
Thank you, Jesus.
>> There's a lot of footwork,
a lot of preparation work,
that goes into making
one of these amazing,
instantaneous events.
By instantaneous, it may
be two or three weeks.
But in the lifecycle of a
forest, it's like a moment.
And we want to come in, protect
the earth, protect the water,
protect all the ruffled feathers
that can happen in a community
when a lot of strangers come in.
And we want to do that and
work with the proper officials
from A to Z.
When our initial crew identifies
the site that we want to use
for the gathering, we work with
the Forest Service resource
people, water
people, land people,
and their traffic and road
people to make sure that we can
have a really good operating
plan that will cover everything
from fire evacuation
if necessary--
or fire preparedness,
which is always necessary--
medical evacuation, land
use, stream protection.
We work on all these things with
the Forest Service officials.
And in the case of
medical, we work
with local hospital officials.
In the case of fire, we work
with the local fire officials.
The local teams meet our teams.
And together, we make a
safe and healthy gathering.
As the scouts come
into a new site,
we try to locate the
major facilities--
such as the comm unit, which is
the medical unit, the bakery,
which is a very high
foot-traffic area,
the Children's Village, called
kiddie city or kiddie village--
to try to locate these
along a network of the most
obvious trail.
Sometimes, we use old
deer and cow trails,
because those are already
broken into the forests.
And then these
trails get marked.
They get flagged.
They get beautiful,
colorful signs with glitter
and all kinds of
frou-frou on them
so that people can find
their way without having
to hike through every
virgin hillside,
trampling the grasses,
because in the end, what
we do is we come to all these
newly made trails between all
this network of
camps and kitchens,
and we water bar them.
We cover them over with
sticks, rocks, and duff.
We do what we call
naturalizing, which is--
we think of, what's the
squirrel's-eye view of this
world after we leave?
Are there no, what we
call, pocket-trash pieces?
Cigarette butts, obviously,
but also little bits of string,
little bits of cellophane,
a candy wrapper--
we clean all these up.
And then, on the
most steep trails,
the ones that are
problematic for erosion
that we would identify
with the Forest Service
as a problem trail, we go
in with a team of people.
And we cut diagonally-offset
water bars,
and rock these water bars, or
put wood in on these water bars
so that, until the foliage
comes back from its roots--
which it does,
for foot traffic--
the water will run off to the
left and run off to the right.
And then the plants
will grow back,
and the trail will vanish,
as if we had never been here.
That's what we try to do.
And I would say that, over the
last 35 years of gatherings,
if you return to the
old gathering sites,
there is no trace anywhere that
all these people were here.
If everybody gathering here
was silver hair-- or partly
silver hair, like me-
I would still gather.
But I wouldn't be nearly
as enthused as I am today,
because when I look
around this camp,
there are a lot of
silver hairs here.
But the great percentage of
the population is young 20s.
And that says to
me that the ideals
that we held as
valuable, or sacred,
or beautiful in the 1960s have
meaning to the young people
today.
And they should have
meaning, because the fact
is that the world is a mess.
And what on Earth
is going to help us?
The world-- there needs to be
some kind of cultural movement
that can bring people together.
And if it's just us old '60s
hippies, it isn't enough.
But when I look
around this camp and I
see all these young people
from the inner city,
from Alaska, from
foreign countries,
working together--
carrying the heavy loads,
building the bridges over the
streams, cooking the food,
washing the pots.
I tell you, there are more
teenagers in this encampment,
in this Rainbow
Gathering, washing dishes
without having to be told to
than at any city in America.
I think this country is
concentrated on family values.
And we've forgotten
community values--
the values of working
together, the values
of helping out that person
who doesn't have a sleeping
bag good enough for the
cold, the values of helping
that handicapped person
in their wheelchair
over that woodland branch.
We grow up in a world
where everybody says,
charity is good, the 1,000
points of light is good.
But we need to teach
this to our young people
as a hands-on experience--
not something you write
a check to in the
mail, but something
you can do with your own
hands, helping another person.
And by that, I don't know
if it saves the world.
But I think it makes the
world a little better place.
>> Hi, there.
My name is Joanie Freedom.
The first gathering
I ever came to
was the tail end of
the Arkansas gathering.
There were 800 people there.
The next time I went to
a gathering was in 1980.
And the gathering was 40
miles from where I lived.
So I hitchhiked over to check
it out and came back and stayed.
It was very, very nice.
Since 1980, I have only missed,
I think, two gatherings.
That's not a lot.
[LAUGHS] I love the gatherings.
It's such a nice
place to center,
to find your spiritual side,
to rejuvenate from the world.
It's pretty hard out in the
world for a lot of people,
and this is a good place to
come and just re-energize.
I come to the gatherings for
the prayer on the 4th of July.
It's the center of
the whole thing.
To pray for peace on Earth--
very important to me.
We have a lot of
spiritual activity.
I have a camp from people
from my area that I camp with.
And we start all our meals
with oms and prayers.
And this whole thing
is very, very touching.
It's a heart song road event.
I don't like to miss them.
The two times that
I missed them,
one was I just couldn't
get it together.
And the second time
was I was in Europe
at the European gathering.
So I guess I didn't
really miss one that year.
I enjoy the camaraderie.
I enjoy that it's a getting
together of an instant village
to live in peace
for a whole week,
to touch on people and enlighten
people to be enlightened,
to find a little
something that you need,
and go back home and be able
to get back into your routine
and pass the love onto others.
When the people that first show
up-- a lot of those people,
they have no homes.
So they're on the road,
so they come early.
They need the assistance
of public assistance.
But when you come to a
gathering of 25,000 people--
I have no idea how
big this gathering is.
I haven't heard any size on it.
But 20,000, 25,000 people
show up in an area--
it's a microcosm of the world
at a gathering so, of course,
there are going to
be some bad apples.
It's all in how
you relate to them.
And to us, community
working together
with the Rainbow Gathering,
will have Shanti sena--
or peacekeepers-- in town
to deal with this problem,
or whatever problem it could be.
And at the same
time, the community--
it's a good shaking of the
hands and saying, hello.
Oh, the first gathering
I hitchhiked to
was in West Virginia.
I've hitchhiked
a couple of them.
But since then, it's a lot
nicer to bring a lot of stuff
in the vehicle.
I've seen the earlier
days of the gathering
where it wasn't as
sophisticated as it is now.
The food-- there
wasn't as much food.
There's a lot more workshops.
Or there are a lot of workshops
at this gathering right now.
We've gotten more
sophisticated over the years.
We have water filtration units.
We've learned how
to make latrines
that are private and clean.
We've learned about washing
hands in the kitchens,
and washing our bowls
and forks and spoons,
and to make it a
healthy gathering.
The setup of tents,
the putting up
with the tarps
over the kitchens,
has really evolved into great
tarp buildings, [LAUGHS]
practically.
I brought a friend this year
for the very first time.
And the most
amazing thing to her
was the kitchens, and how
they build the counters,
and how the structures of every
kitchen is entirely different.
It's a creative process by the
individuals that come here.
And we all come
for the same thing.
We come to pray
for peace on Earth,
and to communicate with each
other about these things,
and to make new friends,
and to reconnect,
and to get lots of hugs, and
there's massages, and romances,
and friendships.
And babies are born, and
we watch the children grow.
It's very nice to see the
young people that are coming,
that are carrying it forward,
that have put amazing kitchens
together, and watch
the cleanliness,
and make sure they
feed the people.
And they reach out, and
they teach, and they touch.
So those that pass over
left a message behind,
and it's still going.
>> Hello, there.
My name is Aaron Funk.
I am a ballroom dance instructor
and disaster relief worker.
And on my off time, I like to
come to the Rainbow Gathering
and help facilitate
building a public forum
in the form of a theater
for the open expression
of the general public at
the Rainbow Gathering.
Well, last night was
the variety show.
You tend to get a
lot of the folks who
are professional musicians
from the gathering that
come through, such as
the Rainbow Gypsies,
Fantuzi, numerous other groups.
But some of the most special
things you'll find on the stage
are things like little Susie
singing "Twinkle, Twinkle,
Little Star," folks who
have never in their lives
gotten on stage in
front of anyone,
and getting a standing
ovation from 1,000 people.
It's really the gems are the
little moments in between.
But there are some fantastic
performers, musicians--
everything from dancers, actors,
musicians, poets, everything
you can imagine.
So basically, when we
come into the forest,
we try to find an area
that's pretty thickly
laden with firewood,
which is snags
and downed dead trees, that
could be of a fire danger.
We clear the mountain and build
many different structures out
of them.
And at the end of it, we either
burn it or clear it to the land
where it will biodegrade with
some speed and efficiency.
Well, we move into an area
that's heavily laden with
fire-danger wood--
such as snags, downed wood,
dead drying from beetle kill,
and things like that.
And we go into it and
clear all of the forest
and then take down the branches
up to eight feet above, which
is similar to what used to
happen in the native times
before there was
industrialization
and white culture in America.
The folks would come through
and collect their kitchen
wood, which would be all of the
downed things on the ground.
So when the fire
would come through,
it would burn just the
low-lying plants and bushes
and keep the forest healthy.
Long story short, I-- as
millions of people around
the world--
watched the events
of Katrina unfold.
And it was very clear,
within three days,
that this was an
extremely unprecedented,
catastrophic event
in the United States.
And it was going
to take everyone
to fix it, everyone to help--
many people
suffering, many people
displaced with no facilities
such as electricity,
running water, communications.
So I realized that
the Rainbow Family
are experts in feeding mass
populaces of people with little
to no resources in
remote locations.
So we made the call, had a
loosely unorganized group,
got together, and went
to Waveland, Mississippi.
But the odd thing about
it was, when we got there,
there was maybe 15 people.
And we hit the ground
running, started cooking.
And for some reason,
we were more efficient
than any organization
on the ground.
I dare say that,
but it's the truth.
So we went, and we
became just that-- one
of the most efficient
operations on the Gulf Coast.
We were the first
operation to open up,
feeding hot meals to the
public on the Gulf Coast,
and the only one to stay open
throughout Hurricane Rita.
But really, the skills
that we acquire here--
from learning everything
from running water lines,
doing medical, trekking
all of your equipment
in and building
your kitchens-- is
exactly what you need to know
in the event of a disaster.
To me, I see Rainbow Gathering
as a constantly changing thing.
It's morphed many times over
the 34 years of its existence.
So Rainbow Gathering,
to me, it's--
I guess, what can you
say, a family reunion.
Many people come here for
many different reasons.
For myself, I find my
connection to God and the spirit
to be internal
and very personal.
So it's not even
something that I discuss,
but this is definitely
100% somewhere
where I find insight and
relief into my spirituality.
I would like to thank my creator
for giving us the opportunity
to gather together
one more time.
I have great faith that
we are on the right path.
It's a bumpy road.
You may often find that,
when you take a journey
and you want to be led by
your creator, it's not easy.
So just like to ask all
parties who come here,
or see us from the outside, to
be as compassionate as possible
and understand that we are on
the same journey as everyone
else, just trying to get
through in the most peaceful way
possible.
Thank you very much.
>> How is being a Rainbow
not like a religion?
OK, first of all,
religion is more
of a root-chakra, tribal thing.
And that's all
the fault of 9/11.
It's more about
belonging and that,
whereas Rainbow is more of a
personal spiritual journey,
which is more like
third-eye chakra.
There are those who
their natural proclivity
of trying to
understand something
is to see it and react to it as
if it were about tribal, if it
were about religion.
But Rainbow respects
all spiritual paths.
And there are religions here.
People come with their camps.
At this gathering, there's
three Christian camps.
There's three Krishna camps.
There's two Hebrew camps.
There's a Pagan camp.
But the rule of thumb in Rainbow
is there's no proselytizing.
You respect other
people's beliefs.
You don't try to change
somebody else's trip.
I mean, you can try.
But there's nobody
in charge here.
Nobody's going to--
your trip is allowed,
so long as you
don't start raining
on somebody else's parade.
And I think it's
really wonderful
when you have our dinner circle,
where you can get anywhere
from a couple hundred
to 6,000 people, sitting
in a circle on the earth
to share a meal together.
And there are 30 different
kitchens providing the food.
And some of those
kitchens are Krishnas.
kitchens are Christians.
And everybody's going
around just making sure
that the people get fed.
I mean, that's what it's all
about-- sharing in the feast.
And that's what a Rainbow
Gathering really is.
It's more of a spiritual feast.
And the path of the spirit--
it's not something that anybody
can determine for another,
ultimately.
The individual has to
decide for themselves
that, this is for me.
I mean, there's
always-- in the world,
there's people that are willing
to tell you what to think.
But here, somebody can tell you
over the fire what to think.
But there's always just
your own conscience.
Nobody's going to make
that much of an effort
to try to convert anybody
into anything here.
And if it seems like,
to somebody who's
never been to a
gathering, that there
is a spiritual bond
between the people here,
that's because it
seems like it's more
the natural bond of people
when they're empowered,
or self empowered, to appreciate
one another and to enjoy life.
For instance, there's
a kitchen over here.
It's called Lovin' Ovens.
And these folks live
all year so that they
can come to the woods,
build a set of ovens,
and bake food for the Family.
And I have to tell you,
when you're 25, 40 miles,
50 miles from
civilization, and you're
sitting out in the
middle of the woods
in the middle of the night
with a couple hundred people--
some of whom you may know,
and some of whom you may never
have known before--
sharing pizza all night long
till dawn, that's just--
And these guys, they
don't just make the pizza.
They'll send pizza
around the camp.
So let's say that you're
at info or you're at
the comm, the medical unit--
you're dealing some trauma,
or something like that--
and all of a sudden,
this pizza arrives out
of the night, delivered
with love and concern
by people that spent their
whole year making sure
that they could be here to make
pizza for the Family for free.
I mean, that's-- then
they wonder why we come.
That period of not
being in a place where
you feel like you belong,
that period of feeling kind of
like, what am I
doing in this world?
It all just goes
right out the window,
because Rainbow itself--
being at a Rainbow Gathering--
is the experience
of, it doesn't really
matter where you've come from
or where you're going next.
There's this timelessness,
this timelessness
of the appreciation of the now.
And if a person or a community
doesn't experience anything
else, that is priceless.